@c Copyright (C) 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GnuPG manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gnupg.texi.

@node Contributors
@unnumbered Contributors to GnuPG
@cindex contributors

The GnuPG project would like to thank its many contributors.  Without
them the project would not have been nearly as successful as it has
been.  Any omissions in this list are accidental.  Feel free to contact
the maintainer if you have been left out or some of your contributions
are not listed.

David Shaw, Matthew Skala, Michael Roth, Niklas Hernaeus, Nils
Ellmenreich, Rémi Guyomarch, Stefan Bellon, Timo Schulz and Werner
Koch wrote the code.  Birger Langkjer, Daniel Resare, Dokianakis
Theofanis, Edmund GRIMLEY EVANS, Gaël Quéri, Gregory Steuck, Nagy
Ferenc László, Ivo Timmermans, Jacobo Tarri'o Barreiro, Janusz
Aleksander Urbanowicz, Jedi Lin, Jouni Hiltunen, Laurentiu Buzdugan,
Magda Procha'zkova', Michael Anckaert, Michal Majer, Marco d'Itri,
Nilgun Belma Buguner, Pedro Morais, Tedi Heriyanto, Thiago Jung
Bauermann, Rafael Caetano dos Santos, Toomas Soome, Urko Lusa, Walter
Koch, Yosiaki IIDA did the official translations. Mike Ashley wrote
and maintains the GNU Privacy Handbook. David Scribner is the current
FAQ editor.  Lorenzo Cappelletti maintains the web site.

The new modularized architecture of gnupg 1.9 as well as the X.509/CMS
part has been developed as part of the Ägypten project.  Direct
contributors to this project are: Bernhard Herzog, who did extensive
testing and tracked down a lot of bugs.  Bernhard Reiter, who made sure
that we met the specifications and the deadlines. He did extensive
testing and came up with a lot of suggestions. Jan-Oliver Wagner made
sure that we met the specifications and the deadlines.  He also did
extensive testing and came up with a lot of suggestions. Karl-Heinz
Zimmer and Marc Mutz had to struggle with all the bugs and
misconceptions while working on KDE integration. Marcus Brinkman
extended GPGME, cleaned up the Assuan code and fixed bugs all over the
place. Moritz Schulte took over Libgcrypt maintenance and developed it
into a stable an useful library.  Steffen Hansen had a hard time to
write the dirmngr due to underspecified interfaces. Thomas Koester did
extensive testing and tracked down a lot of bugs.  Werner Koch designed
the system and wrote most of the code.

The following people helped greatly by suggesting improvements,
testing, fixing bugs, providing resources and doing other important
tasks: Adam Mitchell, Albert Chin, Alec Habig, Allan Clark, Anand
Kumria, Andreas Haumer, Anthony Mulcahy, Ariel T Glenn, Bob Mathews,
Bodo Moeller, Brendan O'Dea, Brenno de Winter, Brian M. Carlson, Brian
Moore, Brian Warner, Bryan Fullerton, Caskey L. Dickson, Cees van de
Griend, Charles Levert, Chip Salzenberg, Chris Adams, Christian Biere,
Christian Kurz, Christian von Roques, Christopher Oliver, Christian
Recktenwald, Dan Winship, Daniel Eisenbud, Daniel Koening, Dave
Dykstra, David C Niemi, David Champion, David Ellement, David
Hallinan, David Hollenberg, David Mathog, David R. Bergstein, Detlef
Lannert, Dimitri, Dirk Lattermann, Dirk Meyer, Disastry, Douglas
Calvert, Ed Boraas, Edmund GRIMLEY EVANS, Edwin Woudt, Enzo
Michelangeli, Ernst Molitor, Fabio Coatti, Felix von Leitner, fish
stiqz, Florian Weimer, Francesco Potorti, Frank Donahoe, Frank
Heckenbach, Frank Stajano, Frank Tobin, Gabriel Rosenkoetter, Gaël
Quéri, Gene Carter, Geoff Keating, Georg Schwarz, Giampaolo Tomassoni,
Gilbert Fernandes, Greg Louis, Greg Troxel, Gregory Steuck, Gregery
Barton, Harald Denker, Holger Baust, Hendrik Buschkamp, Holger
Schurig, Holger Smolinski, Holger Trapp, Hugh Daniel, Huy Le, Ian
McKellar, Ivo Timmermans, Jan Krueger, Jan Niehusmann, Janusz
A. Urbanowicz, James Troup, Jean-loup Gailly, Jeff Long, Jeffery Von
Ronne, Jens Bachem, Jeroen C. van Gelderen, J Horacio MG, J. Michael
Ashley, Jim Bauer, Jim Small, Joachim Backes, Joe Rhett, John
A. Martin, Johnny Teveßen, Jörg Schilling, Jos Backus, Joseph Walton,
Juan F. Codagnone, Jun Kuriyama, Kahil D. Jallad, Karl Fogel, Karsten
Thygesen, Katsuhiro Kondou, Kazu Yamamoto, Keith Clayton, Kevin Ryde,
Klaus Singvogel, Kurt Garloff, Lars Kellogg-Stedman, L. Sassaman, M
Taylor, Marcel Waldvogel, Marco d'Itri, Marco Parrone, Marcus
Brinkmann, Mark Adler, Mark Elbrecht, Mark Pettit, Markus Friedl,
Martin Kahlert, Martin Hamilton, Martin Schulte, Matt Kraai, Matthew
Skala, Matthew Wilcox, Matthias Urlichs, Max Valianskiy, Michael
Engels, Michael Fischer v. Mollard, Michael Roth, Michael Sobolev,
Michael Tokarev, Nicolas Graner, Mike McEwan, Neal H Walfield, Nelson
H. F. Beebe, NIIBE Yutaka, Niklas Hernaeus, Nimrod Zimerman, N J Doye,
Oliver Haakert, Oskari Jääskeläinen, Pascal Scheffers, Paul D. Smith,
Per Cederqvist, Phil Blundell, Philippe Laliberte, Peter Fales, Peter
Gutmann, Peter Marschall, Peter Valchev, Piotr Krukowiecki, QingLong,
Ralph Gillen, Rat, Reinhard Wobst, Rémi Guyomarch, Reuben Sumner,
Richard Outerbridge, Robert Joop, Roddy Strachan, Roger Sondermann,
Roland Rosenfeld, Roman Pavlik, Ross Golder, Ryan Malayter, Sam
Roberts, Sami Tolvanen, Sean MacLennan, Sebastian Klemke, Serge
Munhoven, SL Baur, Stefan Bellon, Dr.Stefan.Dalibor, Stefan Karrmann,
Stefan Keller, Steffen Ullrich, Steffen Zahn, Steven Bakker, Steven
Murdoch, Susanne Schultz, Ted Cabeen, Thiago Jung Bauermann, Thijmen
Klok, Thomas Roessler, Tim Mooney, Timo Schulz, Todd Vierling, TOGAWA
Satoshi, Tom Spindler, Tom Zerucha, Tomas Fasth, Tommi Komulainen,
Thomas Klausner, Tomasz Kozlowski, Thomas Mikkelsen, Ulf Möller, Urko
Lusa, Vincent P. Broman, Volker Quetschke, W Lewis, Walter Hofmann,
Walter Koch, Wayne Chapeskie, Wim Vandeputte, Winona Brown, Yosiaki
IIDA, Yoshihiro Kajiki and Gerlinde Klaes.

This software has been made possible by the previous work of Chris
Wedgwood, Jean-loup Gailly, Jon Callas, Mark Adler, Martin Hellmann
Paul Kendall, Philip R. Zimmermann, Peter Gutmann, Philip A. Nelson,
Taher Elgamal, Torbjorn Granlund, Whitfield Diffie, some unknown NSA
mathematicians and all the folks who have worked hard to create
complete and free operating systems.

And finally we'd like to thank everyone who uses these tools, submits
bug reports and generally reminds us why we're doing this work in the
first place.
