@c Copyright (C) 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GnuPG manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gnupg.texi.

@node Debugging
@chapter How to solve problems

Everyone knows that software often does not do what it should do and thus
there is a need to track down problems.  We call this debugging in a
reminiscent to the moth jamming a relay in a Mark II box back in 1947.

Most of the probelsm a merely configuration and user problems but
nevertheless there are the most annoying ones and reposnible for may
gray hairs.  We try to give some guidelines here on how to identify and
solve the problem at hand.


@menu
* Debugging Tools::       Description of some useful tools
* Common Problems::       Commonly seen problems.
@end menu


@node Debugging Tools
@section Debugging Tools

The GnuPG distribution comes with a couple of tools, useful to help find
and solving problems.

@menu
* kbxutil::        Scrutinizing a keybox file.
@end menu

@node kbxutil
@subsection Scrutinizing a keybox file

A keybox is a file fomat used to store public keys along with meta
information and indices.  The commonly used one is the file
@file{pubring.kbx} in the @file{.gnupg} directory. It contains all
X.509 certificates as well as OpenPGP keys@footnote{Well, OpenPGP keys
are not implemented, @command{gpg} still used the keyring file
@file{pubring.gpg}} .

@noindent
When called the standard way, e.g.:

@samp{kbxutil ~/.gnupg/pubring.kbx}

@noindent
it lists all records (called @acronym{blobs}) with there meta-information
in a human readable format.

@noindent
To see statistics on the keybox in question, run it using

@samp{kbxutil --stats ~/.gnupg/pubring.kbx}

@noindent
and you get an output like:

@example
Total number of blobs:       99
               header:        1
                empty:        0
              openpgp:        0
                 x509:       98
          non flagged:       81
       secret flagged:        0
    ephemeral flagged:       17
@end example

In this example you see that the keybox does not have any OpenPGP keys
but contains 98 X.509 cerificates and a total of 17 keys or certificates
are flagges as ephemeral, meaning that they are only temporary stored
(cached) in the keybox and won't get listed using the usual commands
provided by @command{gpgsm} or @command{gpg}. 81 certifcates are stored
in a standard way and directly available from @command{gpgsm}.





@node Common Problems
@section Commonly Seen Problems


@itemize @bullet
@item Error code @samp{Not supported} from Dirmngr

Most likely the option @option{enable-ocsp} is active for gpgsm
but Dirmngr's OCSP feature has not been enabled using
@option{allow-ocsp} in @file{dirmngr.conf}.

@item The Curses based Pinentry does not work

The far most common reason for this is that the environment variable
@code{GPG_TTY} has not been set correctly.  Make sure that it has been
set to a real tty devce and not just to @samp{/dev/tty};
i.e. @samp{GPG_TTY=tty} is plainly wrong; what you want is
@samp{GPG_TTY=`tty`} --- note the back ticks.  Also make sure that
this environment variable gets exported, that is you should follow up
the setting with an @samp{export GPG_TTY} (assuming a Bourne style
shell). Even for GUI based Pinentries; you should have set
@code{GPG_TTY}. See the section on installing the @program{gpg-agent}
on how to do it.



@end itemize

