\input texinfo                      @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gnupg.info

@include version.texi

@macro copyrightnotice
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@end macro
@macro permissionnotice
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'', the Front-Cover
texts being (a) (see below), and with the Back-Cover Texts being (b)
(see below).  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end macro


@settitle Using the GNU Privacy Guard

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@c printing stuff taken from gcc.
@macro gnupgtabopt{body}
@code{\body\}
@end macro
@macro gnupgoptlist{body}
@smallexample
\body\
@end smallexample
@end macro
@c Makeinfo handles the above macro OK, TeX needs manual line breaks;
@c they get lost at some point in handling the macro.  But if @macro is
@c used here rather than @alias, it produces double line breaks.
@iftex
@alias gol = *
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro gol
@end macro
@end ifnottex


@c Change the font used for @def... commands, since the default
@c proportional one used is bad for names starting __.
@tex
\global\setfont\defbf\ttbshape{10}{\magstep1}
@end tex

@c %**end of header

@ifnottex
@dircategory GNU Utilities
@direntry
* gpg: (gnupg).            OpenPGP encryption and signing tool.
* gpgsm: (gnupg).          S/MIME encryption and signing tool.
@end direntry
This file documents the use and the internals of the GNU Privacy Guard.

This is Edition @value{EDITION}, last updated @value{UPDATED}, of
@cite{The `GNU Privacy Guard' Manual}, for Version @value{VERSION}.
@sp 1
Published by the Free Software Foundation@*
59 Temple Place - Suite 330@*
Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
@sp 1
@copyrightnotice{}
@sp 1
@permissionnotice{}
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title Using the GNU Privacy Guard
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author Werner Koch @code{(wk@@gnupg.org)}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@copyrightnotice{}
@sp 2
@permissionnotice{}
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page


@node Top
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This manual documents how to use the GNU Privay Guard system as well as
the administartion and the architecture.

@c * Gpg::             Using the OpenPGP protocol.
@menu
* Invoking GPGSM::      Using the S/MIME protocol.
* Invoking GPG-AGENT::  How to launch the secret key daemon.
* Invoking SCDAEMON::   How to handle Smartcards.

Developer information

* Assuan::              Description of the Assuan protocol.

Miscellaneous

* Copying::             GNU General Public License says
                        how you can copy and share GnuPG
* GNU Free Documentation License:: How you can copy and share this manual.
* Contributors::        People who have contributed to GnuPG.

Indices

* Option Index::        Index to command line options.
* Index::	        Index of concepts and symbol names.
@end menu

@include gpgsm.texi
@include gpg-agent.texi
@include scdaemon.texi

@include assuan.texi

@include gpl.texi
@include fdl.texi

@include contrib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

@printindex op

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye


