\input texinfo                      @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gnupg1.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Using the GnuPG Version 1.4

@c A couple of macros with no effect on texinfo
@c but used by the yat2m processor. 
@macro manpage {a}
@end macro
@macro mansect {a}
@end macro
@macro manpause 
@end macro
@macro mancont
@end macro

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@c %**end of header
@copying
This is the @cite{The GNU Privacy Guard Manual}
(@value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

@iftex
Published by the Free Software Foundation@*
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor@*
Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
@end iftex

Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version. The text of the license can be found in the
section entitled ``Copying''.
@end quotation
@end copying


@dircategory GNU Utilities
@direntry
* gpg: (gpg).            OpenPGP encryption and signing tool (v1).
@end direntry


@c
@c Printing stuff taken from gcc.
@c
@macro gnupgtabopt{body}
@code{\body\}
@end macro
@macro gnupgoptlist{body}
@smallexample
\body\
@end smallexample
@end macro
@c Makeinfo handles the above macro OK, TeX needs manual line breaks;
@c they get lost at some point in handling the macro.  But if @macro is
@c used here rather than @alias, it produces double line breaks.
@iftex
@alias gol = *
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro gol
@end macro
@end ifnottex


@c
@c Titlepage
@c
@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Using the GNU Privacy Guard, Version 1.4
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}

@author Werner Koch (@email{wk@@gnupg.org})

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@summarycontents
@contents
@page
@end ifnothtml

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top 
@insertcopying

@noindent
This manual documents how to use the standalone version of GNU Privacy Guard.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Invoking GPG::        Using the classic GPG protocol.
* Specify a User ID::   How to Specify a User Id.

* Copying::             GNU General Public License says
                        how you can copy and share GnuPG
* Option Index::        Index to command line options.
* Index::	        Index of concepts and symbol names.
@end menu

@ifhtml

@end ifhtml


@ifhtml
@page
@summarycontents
@contents
@end ifhtml


@include gpg.texi

@node Specify a User ID
@chapter How to Specify a User Id
@anchor{how-to-specify-a-user-id}
@include specify-user-id.texi

@include gpl.texi


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

@printindex op

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye


