.\" Created from Texinfo source by yat2m 1.0
.TH GPG-ZIP 1 2011-02-23 "GnuPG 1.4" "GNU Privacy Guard"
.SH NAME
.B gpg-zip \- Encrypt or sign files into an archive
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  gpg-zip
.RI [ options ]
.I filename1
.I [ filename2, ... ]
.I directory1
.I [ directory2, ... ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBgpg-zip\fR encrypts or signs files into an archive.  It is an
gpg-ized tar using the same format as used by PGP's PGP Zip.

.SH OPTIONS

\fBgpg-zip\fR understands these options:


.TP
.B  --encrypt
.TP
.B  -e
Encrypt data.  This option may be combined with \fB--symmetric\fR (for  output that may be decrypted via a secret key or a passphrase).

.TP
.B  --decrypt
.TP
.B  -d
Decrypt data.

.TP
.B  --symmetric
.TP
.B  -c
Encrypt with a symmetric cipher using a passphrase.  The default
symmetric cipher used is CAST5, but may be chosen with the
\fB--cipher-algo\fR option to \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --sign
.TP
.B  -s
Make a signature.  See \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --recipient \fIuser\fR
.TP
.B  -r \fIuser\fR
Encrypt for user id \fIuser\fR. See \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --local-user \fIuser\fR
.TP
.B  -u \fIuser\fR
Use \fIuser\fR as the key to sign with.  See \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --list-archive
List the contents of the specified archive.

.TP
.B  --output \fIfile\fR
.TP
.B  -o \fIfile\fR
Write output to specified file \fIfile\fR.

.TP
.B  --gpg \fIgpgcmd\fR
Use the specified command \fIgpgcmd\fR instead of \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --gpg-args \fIargs\fR
Pass the specified options to \fBgpg\fR.

.TP
.B  --tar \fItarcmd\fR
Use the specified command \fItarcmd\fR instead of \fBtar\fR.

.TP
.B  --tar-args \fIargs\fR
Pass the specified options to \fBtar\fR.

.TP
.B  --version
Print version of the program and exit.

.TP
.B  --help
Display a brief help page and exit.


.SH EXAMPLES

Encrypt the contents of directory \(oq\fImydocs\fR\(cq for user Bob to file
\(oq\fItest1\fR\(cq:

.RS 2
.nf
gpg-zip --encrypt --output test1 --gpg-args  -r Bob mydocs
.fi
.RE


List the contents of archive \(oq\fItest1\fR\(cq:

.RS 2
.nf
gpg-zip --list-archive test1
.fi
.RE


.SH DIAGNOSTICS

The program returns 0 if everything was fine, 1 otherwise.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgpg\fR(1),
\fBtar\fR(1),

The full documentation for this tool is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If GnuPG and the info program are properly installed at your site, the
command

.RS 2
.nf
info gnupg
.fi
.RE

should give you access to the complete manual including a menu structure
and an index.
