@c instguide.texi - Installation guide for GnuPG
@c Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GnuPG manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gnupg.texi.

@node Installation
@chapter A short installation guide.

Unfortunately the installation guide has not been finished in time.
Instead of delaying the release of GnuPG 2.0 even further, I decided to
release without that guide.  The chapter on gpg-agent and gpgsm do
include brief information on how to set up the whole thing.  Please
watch the GnuPG website for updates of the documentation.  In the
meantime you may search the GnuPG mailing list archives or ask on the
gnupg-users mailing listsfor advise on how to solve problems or how to
get that whole thing up and running. 

** Building the software

Building the software is decribed in the file @file{INSTALL}.  Given
that you are already reading this documentation we can only give some
extra hints

To comply with the rules on GNU systems you should have build time
configured @command{dirmngr} using:

@example
./configure --sysconfdir=/etc --localstatedir=/var
@end example

This is to make sure that system wide configuration files are searched
in the directory @file{/etc/gnupg} and variable data below @file{/var};
the default would be to also install them below @file{/usr/local} where
the binaries get installed.  If you selected to use the
@option{--prefix=/} you obviously don't need those option as they are
the default then.



** Explain how to setup a root CA key as trusted


Such questions may also help to write a proper installation guide.

[to be written]


XXX Tell how to setup the system, install certificates, how dirmngr relates
to GnuPG etc.

** Explain how to setup a root CA key as trusted

X.509 is based on a hierarchical key infrastructure.  At the root of the
tree a trusted anchor (root certificate) is required.  There are usually
no other means of verifying whether this root certificate is trustworthy
than looking it up in a list. GnuPG uses a file (@file{trustlist.txt})
to keep track of all root certificates it knows about.  There are 3 ways
to get certificates into this list:

@itemize
@item
Use the list which comes with GnuPG. However this list only
contains a few root certificates.  Most installations will need more.

@item
Let @command{gpgsm} ask you whether you want to insert a new root
certificate.  To enable this feature you need to set the option
@option{allow-mark-trusted} into @file{gpg-agent.conf}.  In general it
is not a good idea to do it this way.  Checking whether a root
certificate is really trustworthy requires decisions, which casual
users are not up to.  Thus, by default this option is not enabled.

@item 
Manually maintain the list of trusted root certificates. For a multi
user installation this can be done once for all users on a machine.
Specific changes on a per-user base are also possible. 
@end itemize

XXX decribe how to maintain trustlist.txt and /etc/gnupg/trustlist.txt.


** How to get the ssh support running

XXX How to use the ssh support.


@section Installation Overview 

XXXX


