@c Copyright (C) 2004, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GnuPG manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file GnuPG.texi.

@include defs.inc

@node Helper Tools
@chapter Helper Tools

GnuPG comes with a couple of smaller tools:

@menu
* watchgnupg::            Read logs from a socket.
* gpgv::                  Verify OpenPGP signatures.
* addgnupghome::          Create .gnupg home directories.
* gpgconf::               Modify .gnupg home directories.
* applygnupgdefaults::    Run gpgconf for all users.
* gpg-preset-passphrase:: Put a passphrase into the cache.
* gpg-connect-agent::     Communicate with a running agent.
* dirmngr-client::        How to use the Dirmngr client tool.
* gpgparsemail::          Parse a mail message into an annotated format
* gpgtar::                Encrypt or sign files into an archive.
* gpg-check-pattern::     Check a passphrase on stdin against the patternfile.
@end menu

@c
@c  WATCHGNUPG
@c
@manpage watchgnupg.1
@node watchgnupg
@section Read logs from a socket
@ifset manverb
.B watchgnupg
\- Read and print logs from a socket
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  watchgnupg
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose ]
.I socketname
@end ifset

@mansect description
Most of the main utilities are able to write their log files to a Unix
Domain socket if configured that way.  @command{watchgnupg} is a simple
listener for such a socket.  It ameliorates the output with a time stamp
and makes sure that long lines are not interspersed with log output from
other utilities.  This tool is not available for Windows.


@noindent
@command{watchgnupg} is commonly invoked as

@example
watchgnupg --force $(gpgconf --list-dirs socketdir)/S.log
@end example
@manpause

@noindent
This starts it on the current terminal for listening on the standard
logging socket (which is either @file{~/.gnupg/S.log} or
@file{/var/run/user/UID/gnupg/S.log}).

@mansect options
@noindent
@command{watchgnupg} understands these options:

@table @gnupgtabopt

@item --force
@opindex force
Delete an already existing socket file.

@anchor{option watchgnupg --tcp}
@item --tcp @var{n}
Instead of reading from a local socket, listen for connects on TCP port
@var{n}.

@item --time-only
@opindex time-only
Do not print the date part of the timestamp.

@item --verbose
@opindex verbose
Enable extra informational output.

@item --version
@opindex version
Print version of the program and exit.

@item --help
@opindex help
Display a brief help page and exit.

@end table

@noindent
@mansect examples
@chapheading Examples

@example
$ watchgnupg --force --time-only $(gpgconf --list-dirs socketdir)/S.log
@end example

This waits for connections on the local socket
(e.g. @file{/home/foo/.gnupg/S.log}) and shows all log entries.  To
make this work the option @option{log-file} needs to be used with all
modules which logs are to be shown.  The suggested entry for the
configuration files is:

@example
log-file socket://
@end example

If the default socket as given above and returned by "echo $(gpgconf
--list-dirs socketdir)/S.log" is not desired an arbitrary socket name
can be specified, for example @file{socket:///home/foo/bar/mysocket}.
For debugging purposes it is also possible to do remote logging.  Take
care if you use this feature because the information is send in the
clear over the network.  Use this syntax in the conf files:

@example
log-file tcp://192.168.1.1:4711
@end example

You may use any port and not just 4711 as shown above; only IP
addresses are supported (v4 and v6) and no host names.  You need to
start @command{watchgnupg} with the @option{tcp} option.  Note that
under Windows the registry entry
@var{HKCU\Software\GNU\GnuPG:DefaultLogFile} can be used to change the
default log output from @code{stderr} to whatever is given by that
entry.  However the only useful entry is a TCP name for remote
debugging.


@mansect see also
@ifset isman
@command{gpg}(1),
@command{gpgsm}(1),
@command{gpg-agent}(1),
@command{scdaemon}(1)
@end ifset
@include see-also-note.texi


@c
@c  GPGV
@c
@include gpgv.texi


@c
@c    ADDGNUPGHOME
@c
@manpage addgnupghome.8
@node addgnupghome
@section Create .gnupg home directories
@ifset manverb
.B addgnupghome
\- Create .gnupg home directories
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  addgnupghome
.I account_1
.IR account_2 ... account_n
@end ifset

@mansect description
If GnuPG is installed on a system with existing user accounts, it is
sometimes required to populate the GnuPG home directory with existing
files.  Especially a @file{trustlist.txt} and a keybox with some
initial certificates are often desired.  This script helps to do this
by copying all files from @file{/etc/skel/.gnupg} to the home
directories of the accounts given on the command line.  It takes care
not to overwrite existing GnuPG home directories.

@noindent
@command{addgnupghome} is invoked by root as:

@example
addgnupghome account1 account2 ... accountn
@end example


@c
@c   GPGCONF
@c
@manpage gpgconf.1
@node gpgconf
@section Modify .gnupg home directories
@ifset manverb
.B gpgconf
\- Modify .gnupg home directories
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B gpgconf
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-list-components
.br
.B gpgconf
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-list-options
.I component
.br
.B gpgconf
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-change-options
.I component
@end ifset


@mansect description
The @command{gpgconf} is a utility to automatically and reasonable
safely query and modify configuration files in the @file{.gnupg} home
directory.  It is designed not to be invoked manually by the user, but
automatically by graphical user interfaces (GUI).@footnote{Please note
that currently no locking is done, so concurrent access should be
avoided.  There are some precautions to avoid corruption with
concurrent usage, but results may be inconsistent and some changes may
get lost.  The stateless design makes it difficult to provide more
guarantees.}

@command{gpgconf} provides access to the configuration of one or more
components of the GnuPG system.  These components correspond more or
less to the programs that exist in the GnuPG framework, like GPG,
GPGSM, DirMngr, etc.  But this is not a strict one-to-one
relationship.  Not all configuration options are available through
@command{gpgconf}.  @command{gpgconf} provides a generic and abstract
method to access the most important configuration options that can
feasibly be controlled via such a mechanism.

@command{gpgconf} can be used to gather and change the options
available in each component, and can also provide their default
values.  @command{gpgconf} will give detailed type information that
can be used to restrict the user's input without making an attempt to
commit the changes.

@command{gpgconf} provides the backend of a configuration editor.  The
configuration editor would usually be a graphical user interface
program that displays the current options, their default
values, and allows the user to make changes to the options.  These
changes can then be made active with @command{gpgconf} again.  Such a
program that uses @command{gpgconf} in this way will be called GUI
throughout this section.

@menu
* Invoking gpgconf::       List of all commands and options.
* Format conventions::     Formatting conventions relevant for all commands.
* Listing components::     List all gpgconf components.
* Checking programs::      Check all programs known to gpgconf.
* Listing options::        List all options of a component.
* Changing options::       Changing options of a component.
* Listing global options:: List all global options.
* Querying versions::      Get and compare software versions.
* Files used by gpgconf::  What files are used by gpgconf.
@end menu

@manpause
@node Invoking gpgconf
@subsection Invoking gpgconf

@mansect commands
One of the following commands must be given:

@table @gnupgtabopt

@item --list-components
List all components.  This is the default command used if none is
specified.

@item --check-programs
List all available backend programs and test whether they are runnable.

@item --list-options @var{component}
List all options of the component @var{component}.

@item --change-options @var{component}
Change the options of the component @var{component}.

@item --check-options @var{component}
Check the options for the component @var{component}.

@item --apply-profile @var{file}
Apply the configuration settings listed in @var{file} to the
configuration files.  If @var{file} has no suffix and no slashes the
command first tries to read a file with the suffix @code{.prf} from
the data directory (@code{gpgconf --list-dirs datadir}) before it
reads the file verbatim.  A profile is divided into sections using the
bracketed  component name.  Each section then lists the option which
shall go into the respective configuration file.

@item --apply-defaults
Update all configuration files with values taken from the global
configuration file (usually @file{/etc/gnupg/gpgconf.conf}).
Note: This is a legacy mechanism.  Please use global configuraion
files instead.

@item --list-dirs [@var{names}]
@itemx -L
Lists the directories used by @command{gpgconf}.  One directory is
listed per line, and each line consists of a colon-separated list where
the first field names the directory type (for example @code{sysconfdir})
and the second field contains the percent-escaped directory.  Although
they are not directories, the socket file names used by
@command{gpg-agent} and @command{dirmngr} are printed as well.  Note
that the socket file names and the @code{homedir} lines are the default
names and they may be overridden by command line switches.  If
@var{names} are given only the directories or file names specified by
the list names are printed without any escaping.

@item --list-config [@var{filename}]
List the global configuration file in a colon separated format.  If
@var{filename} is given, check that file instead.

@item --check-config [@var{filename}]
Run a syntax check on the global configuration file.  If @var{filename}
is given, check that file instead.


@item --query-swdb @var{package_name} [@var{version_string}]
Returns the current version for @var{package_name} and if
@var{version_string} is given also an indicator on whether an update
is available.  The actual file with the software version is
automatically downloaded and checked by @command{dirmngr}.
@command{dirmngr} uses a thresholds to avoid download the file too
often and it does this by default only if it can be done via Tor.  To
force an update of that file this command can be used:

@example
       gpg-connect-agent --dirmngr 'loadswdb --force' /bye
@end example

@item --reload [@var{component}]
@itemx -R
@opindex reload
Reload all or the given component. This is basically the same as
sending a SIGHUP to the component.  Components which don't support
reloading are ignored.  Without @var{component} or by using "all" for
@var{component} all components which are daemons are reloaded.

@item --launch [@var{component}]
@opindex launch
If the @var{component} is not already running, start it.
@command{component} must be a daemon.  This is in general not required
because the system starts these daemons as needed.  However, external
software making direct use of @command{gpg-agent} or @command{dirmngr}
may use this command to ensure that they are started.  Using "all" for
@var{component} launches all components which are daemons.

@item --kill [@var{component}]
@itemx -K
@opindex kill
Kill the given component that runs as a daemon, including
@command{gpg-agent}, @command{dirmngr}, and @command{scdaemon}.  A
@command{component} which does not run as a daemon will be ignored.
Using "all" for @var{component} kills all components running as
daemons.  Note that as of now reload and kill have the same effect for
@command{scdaemon}.

@item --create-socketdir
@opindex create-socketdir
Create a directory for sockets below /run/user or /var/run/user.  This
is command is only required if a non default home directory is used
and the /run based sockets shall be used.  For the default home
directory GnUPG creates a directory on the fly.

@item --remove-socketdir
@opindex remove-socketdir
Remove a directory created with command @option{--create-socketdir}.

@end table


@mansect options

The following options may be used:

@table @gnupgtabopt

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output @var{file}
Write output to @var{file}.  Default is to write to stdout.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Outputs additional information while running.  Specifically, this
extends numerical field values by human-readable descriptions.

@item -q
@itemx --quiet
@opindex quiet
Try to be as quiet as possible.

@include opt-homedir.texi

@item -n
@itemx --dry-run
Do not actually change anything.  This is currently only implemented
for @code{--change-options} and can be used for testing purposes.

@item -r
@itemx --runtime
Only used together with @code{--change-options}.  If one of the
modified options can be changed in a running daemon process, signal
the running daemon to ask it to reparse its configuration file after
changing.

This means that the changes will take effect at run-time, as far as
this is possible.  Otherwise, they will take effect at the next start
of the respective backend programs.

@item --status-fd @var{n}
@opindex status-fd
Write special status strings to the file descriptor @var{n}.  This
program returns the status messages SUCCESS or FAILURE which are
helpful when the caller uses a double fork approach and can't easily
get the return code of the process.

@manpause
@end table


@node Format conventions
@subsection Format conventions

Some lines in the output of @command{gpgconf} contain a list of
colon-separated fields.  The following conventions apply:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The GUI program is required to strip off trailing newline and/or
carriage return characters from the output.

@item
@command{gpgconf} will never leave out fields.  If a certain version
provides a certain field, this field will always be present in all
@command{gpgconf} versions from that time on.

@item
Future versions of @command{gpgconf} might append fields to the list.
New fields will always be separated from the previously last field by
a colon separator.  The GUI should be prepared to parse the last field
it knows about up until a colon or end of line.

@item
Not all fields are defined under all conditions.  You are required to
ignore the content of undefined fields.
@end itemize

There are several standard types for the content of a field:

@table @asis
@item verbatim
Some fields contain strings that are not escaped in any way.  Such
fields are described to be used @emph{verbatim}.  These fields will
never contain a colon character (for obvious reasons).  No de-escaping
or other formatting is required to use the field content.  This is for
easy parsing of the output, when it is known that the content can
never contain any special characters.

@item percent-escaped
Some fields contain strings that are described to be
@emph{percent-escaped}.  Such strings need to be de-escaped before
their content can be presented to the user.  A percent-escaped string
is de-escaped by replacing all occurrences of @code{%XY} by the byte
that has the hexadecimal value @code{XY}.  @code{X} and @code{Y} are
from the set @code{0-9a-f}.

@item localized
Some fields contain strings that are described to be @emph{localized}.
Such strings are translated to the active language and formatted in
the active character set.

@item @w{unsigned number}
Some fields contain an @emph{unsigned number}.  This number will
always fit into a 32-bit unsigned integer variable.  The number may be
followed by a space, followed by a human readable description of that
value (if the verbose option is used).  You should ignore everything
in the field that follows the number.

@item @w{signed number}
Some fields contain a @emph{signed number}.  This number will always
fit into a 32-bit signed integer variable.  The number may be followed
by a space, followed by a human readable description of that value (if
the verbose option is used).  You should ignore everything in the
field that follows the number.

@item @w{boolean value}
Some fields contain a @emph{boolean value}.  This is a number with
either the value 0 or 1.  The number may be followed by a space,
followed by a human readable description of that value (if the verbose
option is used).  You should ignore everything in the field that follows
the number; checking just the first character is sufficient in this
case.

@item option
Some fields contain an @emph{option} argument.  The format of an
option argument depends on the type of the option and on some flags:

@table @asis
@item no argument
The simplest case is that the option does not take an argument at all
(@var{type} @code{0}).  Then the option argument is an unsigned number
that specifies how often the option occurs.  If the @code{list} flag
is not set, then the only valid number is @code{1}.  Options that do
not take an argument never have the @code{default} or @code{optional
arg} flag set.

@item number
If the option takes a number argument (@var{alt-type} is @code{2} or
@code{3}), and it can only occur once (@code{list} flag is not set),
then the option argument is either empty (only allowed if the argument
is optional), or it is a number.  A number is a string that begins
with an optional minus character, followed by one or more digits.  The
number must fit into an integer variable (unsigned or signed,
depending on @var{alt-type}).

@item number list
If the option takes a number argument and it can occur more than once,
then the option argument is either empty, or it is a comma-separated
list of numbers as described above.

@item string
If the option takes a string argument (@var{alt-type} is 1), and it
can only occur once (@code{list} flag is not set) then the option
argument is either empty (only allowed if the argument is optional),
or it starts with a double quote character (@code{"}) followed by a
percent-escaped string that is the argument value.  Note that there is
only a leading double quote character, no trailing one.  The double
quote character is only needed to be able to differentiate between no
value and the empty string as value.

@item string list
If the option takes a string argument and it can occur more than once,
then the option argument is either empty, or it is a comma-separated
list of string arguments as described above.
@end table
@end table

The active language and character set are currently determined from
the locale environment of the @command{gpgconf} program.

@c FIXME: Document the active language and active character set.  Allow
@c to change it via the command line?


@mansect usage
@node Listing components
@subsection Listing components

The command @code{--list-components} will list all components that can
be configured with @command{gpgconf}.  Usually, one component will
correspond to one GnuPG-related program and contain the options of
that program's configuration file that can be modified using
@command{gpgconf}.  However, this is not necessarily the case.  A
component might also be a group of selected options from several
programs, or contain entirely virtual options that have a special
effect rather than changing exactly one option in one configuration
file.

A component is a set of configuration options that semantically belong
together.  Furthermore, several changes to a component can be made in
an atomic way with a single operation.  The GUI could for example
provide a menu with one entry for each component, or a window with one
tabulator sheet per component.

The command @code{--list-components} lists all available
components, one per line.  The format of each line is:

@code{@var{name}:@var{description}:@var{pgmname}:}

@table @var
@item name
This field contains a name tag of the component.  The name tag is used
to specify the component in all communication with @command{gpgconf}.
The name tag is to be used @emph{verbatim}.  It is thus not in any
escaped format.

@item description
The @emph{string} in this field contains a human-readable description
of the component.  It can be displayed to the user of the GUI for
informational purposes.  It is @emph{percent-escaped} and
@emph{localized}.

@item pgmname
The @emph{string} in this field contains the absolute name of the
program's file.  It can be used to unambiguously invoke that program.
It is @emph{percent-escaped}.
@end table

Example:
@example
$ gpgconf --list-components
gpg:GPG for OpenPGP:/usr/local/bin/gpg2:
gpg-agent:GPG Agent:/usr/local/bin/gpg-agent:
scdaemon:Smartcard Daemon:/usr/local/bin/scdaemon:
gpgsm:GPG for S/MIME:/usr/local/bin/gpgsm:
dirmngr:Directory Manager:/usr/local/bin/dirmngr:
@end example



@node Checking programs
@subsection Checking programs

The command @code{--check-programs} is similar to
@code{--list-components} but works on backend programs and not on
components.  It runs each program to test whether it is installed and
runnable.  This also includes a syntax check of all config file options
of the program.

The command @code{--check-programs} lists all available
programs, one per line.  The format of each line is:

@code{@var{name}:@var{description}:@var{pgmname}:@var{avail}:@var{okay}:@var{cfgfile}:@var{line}:@var{error}:}

@table @var
@item name
This field contains a name tag of the program which is identical to the
name of the component.  The name tag is to be used @emph{verbatim}.  It
is thus not in any escaped format.  This field may be empty to indicate
a continuation of error descriptions for the last name.  The description
and pgmname fields are then also empty.

@item description
The @emph{string} in this field contains a human-readable description
of the component.  It can be displayed to the user of the GUI for
informational purposes.  It is @emph{percent-escaped} and
@emph{localized}.

@item pgmname
The @emph{string} in this field contains the absolute name of the
program's file.  It can be used to unambiguously invoke that program.
It is @emph{percent-escaped}.

@item avail
The @emph{boolean value} in this field indicates whether the program is
installed and runnable.

@item okay
The @emph{boolean value} in this field indicates whether the program's
config file is syntactically okay.

@item cfgfile
If an error occurred in the configuration file (as indicated by a false
value in the field @code{okay}), this field has the name of the failing
configuration file.  It is @emph{percent-escaped}.

@item line
If an error occurred in the configuration file, this field has the line
number of the failing statement in the configuration file.
It is an @emph{unsigned number}.

@item error
If an error occurred in the configuration file, this field has the error
text of the failing statement in the configuration file.  It is
@emph{percent-escaped} and @emph{localized}.

@end table

@noindent
In the following example the @command{dirmngr} is not runnable and the
configuration file of @command{scdaemon} is not okay.

@example
$ gpgconf --check-programs
gpg:GPG for OpenPGP:/usr/local/bin/gpg2:1:1:
gpg-agent:GPG Agent:/usr/local/bin/gpg-agent:1:1:
scdaemon:Smartcard Daemon:/usr/local/bin/scdaemon:1:0:
gpgsm:GPG for S/MIME:/usr/local/bin/gpgsm:1:1:
dirmngr:Directory Manager:/usr/local/bin/dirmngr:0:0:
@end example

@noindent
The command @w{@code{--check-options @var{component}}} will verify the
configuration file in the same manner as @code{--check-programs}, but
only for the component @var{component}.


@node Listing options
@subsection Listing options

Every component contains one or more options.  Options may be gathered
into option groups to allow the GUI to give visual hints to the user
about which options are related.

The command @code{@w{--list-options @var{component}}} lists
all options (and the groups they belong to) in the component
@var{component}, one per line.  @var{component} must be the string in
the field @var{name} in the output of the @code{--list-components}
command.

Take care if system-wide options are used: gpgconf may not be able to
properly show the options and the listed options may have no actual
effect in case the system-wide options enforced their own settings.

There is one line for each option and each group.  First come all
options that are not in any group.  Then comes a line describing a
group.  Then come all options that belong into each group.  Then comes
the next group and so on.  There does not need to be any group (and in
this case the output will stop after the last non-grouped option).

The format of each line is:

@code{@var{name}:@var{flags}:@var{level}:@var{description}:@var{type}:@var{alt-type}:@var{argname}:@var{default}:@var{argdef}:@var{value}}

@table @var
@item name
This field contains a name tag for the group or option.  The name tag
is used to specify the group or option in all communication with
@command{gpgconf}.  The name tag is to be used @emph{verbatim}.  It is
thus not in any escaped format.

@item flags
The flags field contains an @emph{unsigned number}.  Its value is the
OR-wise combination of the following flag values:

@table @code
@item group (1)
If this flag is set, this is a line describing a group and not an
option.
@end table

The following flag values are only defined for options (that is, if
the @code{group} flag is not used).

@table @code
@item optional arg (2)
If this flag is set, the argument is optional.  This is never set for
@var{type} @code{0} (none) options.

@item list (4)
If this flag is set, the option can be given multiple times.

@item runtime (8)
If this flag is set, the option can be changed at runtime.

@item default (16)
If this flag is set, a default value is available.

@item default desc (32)
If this flag is set, a (runtime) default is available.  This and the
@code{default} flag are mutually exclusive.

@item no arg desc (64)
If this flag is set, and the @code{optional arg} flag is set, then the
option has a special meaning if no argument is given.

@item no change (128)
If this flag is set, @command{gpgconf} ignores requests to change the
value.  GUI frontends should grey out this option.  Note, that manual
changes of the configuration files are still possible.
@end table

@item level
This field is defined for options and for groups.  It contains an
@emph{unsigned number} that specifies the expert level under which
this group or option should be displayed.  The following expert levels
are defined for options (they have analogous meaning for groups):

@table @code
@item basic (0)
This option should always be offered to the user.

@item advanced (1)
This option may be offered to advanced users.

@item expert (2)
This option should only be offered to expert users.

@item invisible (3)
This option should normally never be displayed, not even to expert
users.

@item internal (4)
This option is for internal use only.  Ignore it.
@end table

The level of a group will always be the lowest level of all options it
contains.

@item description
This field is defined for options and groups.  The @emph{string} in
this field contains a human-readable description of the option or
group.  It can be displayed to the user of the GUI for informational
purposes.  It is @emph{percent-escaped} and @emph{localized}.

@item type
This field is only defined for options.  It contains an @emph{unsigned
number} that specifies the type of the option's argument, if any.  The
following types are defined:

Basic types:

@table @code
@item none (0)
No argument allowed.

@item string (1)
An @emph{unformatted string}.

@item int32 (2)
A @emph{signed number}.

@item uint32 (3)
An @emph{unsigned number}.
@end table

Complex types:

@table @code
@item pathname (32)
A @emph{string} that describes the pathname of a file.  The file does
not necessarily need to exist.

@item ldap server (33)
A @emph{string} that describes an LDAP server in the format:

@code{@var{hostname}:@var{port}:@var{username}:@var{password}:@var{base_dn}}

@item key fingerprint (34)
A @emph{string} with a 40 digit fingerprint specifying a certificate.

@item pub key (35)
A @emph{string} that describes a certificate by user ID, key ID or
fingerprint.

@item sec key (36)
A @emph{string} that describes a certificate with a key by user ID,
key ID or fingerprint.

@item alias list (37)
A @emph{string} that describes an alias list, like the one used with
gpg's group option.  The list consists of a key, an equal sign and space
separated values.
@end table

More types will be added in the future.  Please see the @var{alt-type}
field for information on how to cope with unknown types.

@item alt-type
This field is identical to @var{type}, except that only the types
@code{0} to @code{31} are allowed.  The GUI is expected to present the
user the option in the format specified by @var{type}.  But if the
argument type @var{type} is not supported by the GUI, it can still
display the option in the more generic basic type @var{alt-type}.  The
GUI must support all the defined basic types to be able to display all
options.  More basic types may be added in future versions.  If the
GUI encounters a basic type it doesn't support, it should report an
error and abort the operation.

@item argname
This field is only defined for options with an argument type
@var{type} that is not @code{0}.  In this case it may contain a
@emph{percent-escaped} and @emph{localized string} that gives a short
name for the argument.  The field may also be empty, though, in which
case a short name is not known.

@item default
This field is defined only for options for which the @code{default} or
@code{default desc} flag is set.  If the @code{default} flag is set,
its format is that of an @emph{option argument} (@pxref{Format
conventions}, for details).  If the default value is empty, then no
default is known.  Otherwise, the value specifies the default value
for this option.  If the @code{default desc} flag is set, the field is
either empty or contains a description of the effect if the option is
not given.

@item argdef
This field is defined only for options for which the @code{optional
arg} flag is set.  If the @code{no arg desc} flag is not set, its
format is that of an @emph{option argument} (@pxref{Format
conventions}, for details).  If the default value is empty, then no
default is known.  Otherwise, the value specifies the default argument
for this option.  If the @code{no arg desc} flag is set, the field is
either empty or contains a description of the effect of this option if
no argument is given.

@item value
This field is defined only for options.  Its format is that of an
@emph{option argument}.  If it is empty, then the option is not
explicitly set in the current configuration, and the default applies
(if any).  Otherwise, it contains the current value of the option.
Note that this field is also meaningful if the option itself does not
take a real argument (in this case, it contains the number of times
the option appears).
@end table


@node Changing options
@subsection Changing options

The command @w{@code{--change-options @var{component}}} will attempt
to change the options of the component @var{component} to the
specified values.  @var{component} must be the string in the field
@var{name} in the output of the @code{--list-components} command.  You
have to provide the options that shall be changed in the following
format on standard input:

@code{@var{name}:@var{flags}:@var{new-value}}

@table @var
@item name
This is the name of the option to change.  @var{name} must be the
string in the field @var{name} in the output of the
@code{--list-options} command.

@item flags
The flags field contains an @emph{unsigned number}.  Its value is the
OR-wise combination of the following flag values:

@table @code
@item default (16)
If this flag is set, the option is deleted and the default value is
used instead (if applicable).
@end table

@item new-value
The new value for the option.  This field is only defined if the
@code{default} flag is not set.  The format is that of an @emph{option
argument}.  If it is empty (or the field is omitted), the default
argument is used (only allowed if the argument is optional for this
option).  Otherwise, the option will be set to the specified value.
@end table

@noindent
The output of the command is the same as that of
@code{--check-options} for the modified configuration file.

Examples:

To set the force option, which is of basic type @code{none (0)}:

@example
$ echo 'force:0:1' | gpgconf --change-options dirmngr
@end example

To delete the force option:

@example
$ echo 'force:16:' | gpgconf --change-options dirmngr
@end example

The @code{--runtime} option can influence when the changes take
effect.


@node Listing global options
@subsection Listing global options

Some legacy applications look at the global configuration file for the
gpgconf tool itself; this is the file @file{gpgconf.conf}.  Modern
applications should not use it but use per component global
configuration files which are more flexible than the
@file{gpgconf.conf}.  Using both files is not suggested.

The colon separated listing format is record oriented and uses the first
field to identify the record type:

@table @code
@item k
This describes a key record to start the definition of a new ruleset for
a user/group.  The format of a key record is:

  @code{k:@var{user}:@var{group}:}

@table @var
@item user
This is the user field of the key.  It is percent escaped.  See the
definition of the gpgconf.conf format for details.

@item group
This is the group field of the key.  It is percent escaped.
@end table

@item r
This describes a rule record. All rule records up to the next key record
make up a rule set for that key.  The format of a rule record is:

  @code{r:::@var{component}:@var{option}:@var{flag}:@var{value}:}

@table @var
@item component
This is the component part of a rule.  It is a plain string.

@item option
This is the option part of a rule.  It is a plain string.

@item flag
This is the flags part of a rule.  There may be only one flag per rule
but by using the same component and option, several flags may be
assigned to an option.  It is a plain string.

@item value
This is the optional value for the option.  It is a percent escaped
string with a single quotation mark to indicate a string.  The quotation
mark is only required to distinguish between no value specified and an
empty string.
@end table

@end table

@noindent
Unknown record types should be ignored.  Note that there is intentionally
no feature to change the global option file through @command{gpgconf}.


@node Querying versions
@subsection Get and compare software versions.

The GnuPG Project operates a server to query the current versions of
software packages related to GnuPG.  @command{gpgconf} can be used to
access this online database.  To allow for offline operations, this
feature works by having @command{dirmngr} download a file from
@code{https://versions.gnupg.org}, checking the signature of that file
and storing the file in the GnuPG home directory.  If
@command{gpgconf} is used and @command{dirmngr} is running, it may ask
@command{dirmngr} to refresh that file before itself uses the file.

The command @option{--query-swdb} returns information for the given
package in a colon delimited format:

@table @var

@item name
This is the name of the package as requested.  Note that "gnupg" is a
special name which is replaced by the actual package implementing this
version of GnuPG.  For this name it is also not required to specify a
version because @command{gpgconf} takes its own version in this case.

@item iversion
The currently installed version or an empty string.  The value is
taken from the command line argument but may be provided by gpg
if not given.

@item status
The status of the software package according to this table:
@table @code
@item -
No information available.  This is either because no current version
has been specified or due to an error.
@item ?
The given name is not known in the online database.
@item u
An update of the software is available.
@item c
The installed version of the software is current.
@item n
The installed version is already newer than the released version.
@end table

@item urgency
If the value (the empty string should be considered as zero) is
greater than zero an important update is available.

@item error
This returns an @command{gpg-error} error code to distinguish between
various failure modes.

@item filedate
This gives the date of the file with the version numbers in standard
ISO format (@code{yyyymmddThhmmss}).  The date has been extracted by
@command{dirmngr} from the signature of the file.

@item verified
This gives the date in ISO format the file was downloaded.  This value
can be used to evaluate the freshness of the information.

@item version
This returns the version string for the requested software from the
file.

@item reldate
This returns the release date in ISO format.

@item size
This returns the size of the package as decimal number of bytes.

@item hash
This returns a hexified SHA-2 hash of the package.

@end table

@noindent
More fields may be added in future to the output.


@mansect files
@node Files used by gpgconf
@subsection Files used by gpgconf

@table @file

@item /etc/gnupg/gpgconf.conf
@cindex gpgconf.conf
  If this file exists, it is processed as a global configuration file.
  This is a legacy mechanism which should not be used tigether with
  the modern global per component configuration files.  A commented
  example can be found in the @file{examples} directory of the
  distribution.

@item @var{GNUPGHOME}/swdb.lst
@cindex swdb.lst
  A file with current software versions.  @command{dirmngr} creates
  this file on demand from an online resource.

@end table


@mansect see also
@ifset isman
@command{gpg}(1),
@command{gpgsm}(1),
@command{gpg-agent}(1),
@command{scdaemon}(1),
@command{dirmngr}(1)
@end ifset
@include see-also-note.texi



@c
@c    APPLYGNUPGDEFAULTS
@c
@manpage applygnupgdefaults.8
@node applygnupgdefaults
@section Run gpgconf for all users
@ifset manverb
.B applygnupgdefaults
\- Run gpgconf --apply-defaults for all users.
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  applygnupgdefaults
@end ifset

@mansect description
This is a legacy script.  Modern application should use the per
component global configuration files under @file{/etc/gnupg/}.

This script is a wrapper around @command{gpgconf} to run it with the
command @code{--apply-defaults} for all real users with an existing
GnuPG home directory.  Admins might want to use this script to update he
GnuPG configuration files for all users after
@file{/etc/gnupg/gpgconf.conf} has been changed.  This allows enforcing
certain policies for all users.  Note, that this is not a bulletproof way to
force a user to use certain options.  A user may always directly edit
the configuration files and bypass gpgconf.

@noindent
@command{applygnupgdefaults} is invoked by root as:

@example
applygnupgdefaults
@end example


@c
@c   GPG-PRESET-PASSPHRASE
@c
@node gpg-preset-passphrase
@section Put a passphrase into the cache
@manpage gpg-preset-passphrase.1
@ifset manverb
.B gpg-preset-passphrase
\- Put a passphrase into gpg-agent's cache
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  gpg-preset-passphrase
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ command ]
.I cache-id
@end ifset

@mansect description
The @command{gpg-preset-passphrase} is a utility to seed the internal
cache of a running @command{gpg-agent} with passphrases.  It is mainly
useful for unattended machines, where the usual @command{pinentry} tool
may not be used and the passphrases for the to be used keys are given at
machine startup.

This program works with GnuPG 2 and later.  GnuPG 1.x is not supported.

Passphrases set with this utility don't expire unless the
@option{--forget} option is used to explicitly clear them from the
cache --- or @command{gpg-agent} is either restarted or reloaded (by
sending a SIGHUP to it).  Note that the maximum cache time as set with
@option{--max-cache-ttl} is still honored.  It is necessary to allow
this passphrase presetting by starting @command{gpg-agent} with the
@option{--allow-preset-passphrase}.

@menu
* Invoking gpg-preset-passphrase::   List of all commands and options.
@end menu

@manpause
@node Invoking gpg-preset-passphrase
@subsection List of all commands and options
@mancont

@noindent
@command{gpg-preset-passphrase} is invoked this way:

@example
gpg-preset-passphrase [options] [command] @var{cacheid}
@end example

@var{cacheid} is either a 40 character keygrip of hexadecimal
characters identifying the key for which the passphrase should be set
or cleared.  The keygrip is listed along with the key when running the
command: @code{gpgsm --with-keygrip --list-secret-keys}.
Alternatively an arbitrary string may be used to identify a
passphrase; it is suggested that such a string is prefixed with the
name of the application (e.g @code{foo:12346}).  Scripts should always
use the option @option{--with-colons}, which provides the keygrip in a
"grp" line (cf. @file{doc/DETAILS})/

@noindent
One of the following command options must be given:

@table @gnupgtabopt
@item --preset
@opindex preset
Preset a passphrase. This is what you usually will
use. @command{gpg-preset-passphrase} will then read the passphrase from
@code{stdin}.

@item --forget
@opindex forget
Flush the passphrase for the given cache ID from the cache.

@end table

@noindent
The following additional options may be used:

@table @gnupgtabopt
@item -v
@itemx --verbose
@opindex verbose
Output additional information while running.

@item -P @var{string}
@itemx --passphrase @var{string}
@opindex passphrase
Instead of reading the passphrase from @code{stdin}, use the supplied
@var{string} as passphrase.  Note that this makes the passphrase visible
for other users.
@end table

@mansect see also
@ifset isman
@command{gpg}(1),
@command{gpgsm}(1),
@command{gpg-agent}(1),
@command{scdaemon}(1)
@end ifset
@include see-also-note.texi




@c
@c   GPG-CONNECT-AGENT
@c
@node gpg-connect-agent
@section Communicate with a running agent
@manpage gpg-connect-agent.1
@ifset manverb
.B gpg-connect-agent
\- Communicate with a running agent
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  gpg-connect-agent
.RI [ options ] [commands]
@end ifset

@mansect description
The @command{gpg-connect-agent} is a utility to communicate with a
running @command{gpg-agent}.  It is useful to check out the commands
@command{gpg-agent} provides using the Assuan interface.  It might
also be useful for scripting simple applications.  Input is expected
at stdin and output gets printed to stdout.

It is very similar to running @command{gpg-agent} in server mode; but
here we connect to a running instance.

@menu
* Invoking gpg-connect-agent::       List of all options.
* Controlling gpg-connect-agent::    Control commands.
@end menu

@manpause
@node Invoking gpg-connect-agent
@subsection List of all options

@noindent
@command{gpg-connect-agent} is invoked this way:

@example
gpg-connect-agent [options] [commands]
@end example
@mancont

@noindent
The following options may be used:

@table @gnupgtabopt
@item -v
@itemx --verbose
@opindex verbose
Output additional information while running.

@item -q
@item --quiet
@opindex q
@opindex quiet
Try to be as quiet as possible.

@include opt-homedir.texi

@item --agent-program @var{file}
@opindex agent-program
Specify the agent program to be started if none is running.  The
default value is determined by running @command{gpgconf} with the
option @option{--list-dirs}.  Note that the pipe symbol (@code{|}) is
used for a regression test suite hack and may thus not be used in the
file name.

@item --dirmngr-program @var{file}
@opindex dirmngr-program
Specify the directory manager (keyserver client) program to be started
if none is running.  This has only an effect if used together with the
option @option{--dirmngr}.

@item --dirmngr
@opindex dirmngr
Connect to a running directory manager (keyserver client) instead of
to the gpg-agent.  If a dirmngr is not running, start it.

@item -S
@itemx --raw-socket @var{name}
@opindex raw-socket
Connect to socket @var{name} assuming this is an Assuan style server.
Do not run any special initializations or environment checks.  This may
be used to directly connect to any Assuan style socket server.

@item -E
@itemx --exec
@opindex exec
Take the rest of the command line as a program and it's arguments and
execute it as an Assuan server. Here is how you would run @command{gpgsm}:
@smallexample
 gpg-connect-agent --exec gpgsm --server
@end smallexample
Note that you may not use options on the command line in this case.

@item --no-ext-connect
@opindex no-ext-connect
When using @option{-S} or @option{--exec}, @command{gpg-connect-agent}
connects to the Assuan server in extended mode to allow descriptor
passing.  This option makes it use the old mode.

@item --no-autostart
@opindex no-autostart
Do not start the gpg-agent or the dirmngr if it has not yet been
started.

@item -r @var{file}
@itemx --run @var{file}
@opindex run
Run the commands from @var{file} at startup and then continue with the
regular input method.  Note, that commands given on the command line are
executed after this file.

@item -s
@itemx --subst
@opindex subst
Run the command @code{/subst} at startup.

@item --hex
@opindex hex
Print data lines in a hex format and the ASCII representation of
non-control characters.

@item --decode
@opindex decode
Decode data lines.  That is to remove percent escapes but make sure that
a new line always starts with a D and a space.

@end table

@mansect control commands
@node Controlling gpg-connect-agent
@subsection Control commands

While reading Assuan commands, gpg-agent also allows a few special
commands to control its operation.  These control commands all start
with a slash (@code{/}).

@table @code

@item /echo @var{args}
Just print @var{args}.

@item /let @var{name} @var{value}
Set the variable @var{name} to @var{value}.  Variables are only
substituted on the input if the @command{/subst} has been used.
Variables are referenced by prefixing the name with a dollar sign and
optionally include the name in curly braces.  The rules for a valid name
are identically to those of the standard bourne shell.  This is not yet
enforced but may be in the future.  When used with curly braces no
leading or trailing white space is allowed.

If a variable is not found, it is searched in the environment and if
found copied to the table of variables.

Variable functions are available: The name of the function must be
followed by at least one space and the at least one argument.  The
following functions are available:

@table @code
@item get
Return a value described by the argument.  Available arguments are:

@table @code
@item cwd
The current working directory.
@item homedir
The gnupg homedir.
@item sysconfdir
GnuPG's system configuration directory.
@item bindir
GnuPG's binary directory.
@item libdir
GnuPG's library directory.
@item libexecdir
GnuPG's library directory for executable files.
@item datadir
GnuPG's data directory.
@item serverpid
The PID of the current server. Command @command{/serverpid} must
have been given to return a useful value.
@end table

@item unescape @var{args}
Remove C-style escapes from @var{args}.  Note that @code{\0} and
@code{\x00} terminate the returned string implicitly.  The string to be
converted are the entire arguments right behind the delimiting space of
the function name.

@item unpercent @var{args}
@itemx unpercent+ @var{args}
Remove percent style escaping from @var{args}.  Note that @code{%00}
terminates the string implicitly.  The string to be converted are the
entire arguments right behind the delimiting space of the function
name. @code{unpercent+} also maps plus signs to a spaces.

@item percent @var{args}
@itemx percent+ @var{args}
Escape the @var{args} using percent style escaping.  Tabs, formfeeds,
linefeeds, carriage returns and colons are escaped. @code{percent+} also
maps spaces to plus signs.

@item errcode @var{arg}
@itemx errsource @var{arg}
@itemx errstring @var{arg}
Assume @var{arg} is an integer and evaluate it using @code{strtol}.  Return
the gpg-error error code, error source or a formatted string with the
error code and error source.


@item +
@itemx -
@itemx *
@itemx /
@itemx %
Evaluate all arguments as long integers using @code{strtol} and apply
this operator.  A division by zero yields an empty string.

@item !
@itemx |
@itemx &
Evaluate all arguments as long integers using @code{strtol} and apply
the logical operators NOT, OR or AND.  The NOT operator works on the
last argument only.


@end table


@item /definq @var{name} @var{var}
Use content of the variable @var{var} for inquiries with @var{name}.
@var{name} may be an asterisk (@code{*}) to match any inquiry.


@item /definqfile @var{name} @var{file}
Use content of @var{file} for inquiries with @var{name}.
@var{name} may be an asterisk (@code{*}) to match any inquiry.

@item /definqprog @var{name} @var{prog}
Run @var{prog} for inquiries matching @var{name} and pass the
entire line to it as command line arguments.

@item /datafile @var{name}
Write all data lines from the server to the file @var{name}.  The file
is opened for writing and created if it does not exists.  An existing
file is first truncated to 0.  The data written to the file fully
decoded.  Using a single dash for @var{name} writes to stdout.  The
file is kept open until a new file is set using this command or this
command is used without an argument.

@item /showdef
Print all definitions

@item /cleardef
Delete all definitions

@item /sendfd @var{file} @var{mode}
Open @var{file} in @var{mode} (which needs to be a valid @code{fopen}
mode string) and send the file descriptor to the server.  This is
usually followed by a command like @code{INPUT FD} to set the
input source for other commands.

@item /recvfd
Not yet implemented.

@item /open @var{var} @var{file} [@var{mode}]
Open @var{file} and assign the file descriptor to @var{var}.  Warning:
This command is experimental and might change in future versions.

@item /close @var{fd}
Close the file descriptor @var{fd}.  Warning: This command is
experimental and might change in future versions.

@item /showopen
Show a list of open files.

@item /serverpid
Send the Assuan command @command{GETINFO pid} to the server and store
the returned PID for internal purposes.

@item /sleep
Sleep for a second.

@item /hex
@itemx /nohex
Same as the command line option @option{--hex}.

@item /decode
@itemx /nodecode
Same as the command line option @option{--decode}.

@item /subst
@itemx /nosubst
Enable and disable variable substitution.  It defaults to disabled
unless the command line option @option{--subst} has been used.
If /subst as been enabled once, leading whitespace is removed from
input lines which makes scripts easier to read.

@item /while @var{condition}
@itemx /end
These commands provide a way for executing loops.  All lines between
the @code{while} and the corresponding @code{end} are executed as long
as the evaluation of @var{condition} yields a non-zero value or is the
string @code{true} or @code{yes}.  The evaluation is done by passing
@var{condition} to the @code{strtol} function.  Example:

@smallexample
  /subst
  /let i 3
  /while $i
    /echo loop counter is $i
    /let i $@{- $i 1@}
  /end
@end smallexample

@item /if @var{condition}
@itemx /end
These commands provide a way for conditional execution.  All lines between
the @code{if} and the corresponding @code{end} are executed only if
the evaluation of @var{condition} yields a non-zero value or is the
string @code{true} or @code{yes}.  The evaluation is done by passing
@var{condition} to the @code{strtol} function.

@item /run @var{file}
Run commands from @var{file}.

@item /bye
Terminate the connection and the program.

@item /help
Print a list of available control commands.

@end table


@ifset isman
@mansect see also
@command{gpg-agent}(1),
@command{scdaemon}(1)
@include see-also-note.texi
@end ifset

@c
@c   DIRMNGR-CLIENT
@c
@node dirmngr-client
@section The Dirmngr Client Tool

@manpage dirmngr-client.1
@ifset manverb
.B dirmngr-client
\- Tool to access the Dirmngr services
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  dirmngr-client
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ certfile | pattern ]
@end ifset

@mansect description
The @command{dirmngr-client} is a simple tool to contact a running
dirmngr and test whether a certificate has been revoked --- either by
being listed in the corresponding CRL or by running the OCSP protocol.
If no dirmngr is running, a new instances will be started but this is
in general not a good idea due to the huge performance overhead.

@noindent
The usual way to run this tool is either:

@example
dirmngr-client @var{acert}
@end example

@noindent
or

@example
dirmngr-client <@var{acert}
@end example

Where @var{acert} is one DER encoded (binary) X.509 certificates to be
tested.
@ifclear isman
The return value of this command is
@end ifclear

@mansect return value
@ifset isman
@command{dirmngr-client} returns these values:
@end ifset
@table @code

@item 0
The certificate under question is valid; i.e. there is a valid CRL
available and it is not listed there or the OCSP request returned that
that certificate is valid.

@item 1
The certificate has been revoked

@item 2 (and other values)
There was a problem checking the revocation state of the certificate.
A message to stderr has given more detailed information.  Most likely
this is due to a missing or expired CRL or due to a network problem.

@end table

@mansect options
@noindent
@command{dirmngr-client} may be called with the following options:


@table @gnupgtabopt
@item --version
@opindex version
Print the program version and licensing information.  Note that you cannot
abbreviate this command.

@item --help, -h
@opindex help
Print a usage message summarizing the most useful command-line options.
Note that you cannot abbreviate this command.

@item --quiet, -q
@opindex quiet
Make the output extra brief by suppressing any informational messages.

@item -v
@item --verbose
@opindex v
@opindex verbose
Outputs additional information while running.
You can increase the verbosity by giving several
verbose commands to @sc{dirmngr}, such as @samp{-vv}.

@item --pem
@opindex pem
Assume that the given certificate is in PEM (armored) format.

@item --ocsp
@opindex ocsp
Do the check using the OCSP protocol and ignore any CRLs.

@item --force-default-responder
@opindex force-default-responder
When checking using the OCSP protocol, force the use of the default OCSP
responder.  That is not to use the Reponder as given by the certificate.

@item --ping
@opindex ping
Check whether the dirmngr daemon is up and running.

@item --cache-cert
@opindex cache-cert
Put the given certificate into the cache of a running dirmngr.  This is
mainly useful for debugging.

@item --validate
@opindex validate
Validate the given certificate using dirmngr's internal validation code.
This is mainly useful for debugging.

@item --load-crl
@opindex load-crl
This command expects a list of filenames with DER encoded CRL files.
With the option @option{--url} URLs are expected in place of filenames
and they are loaded directly from the given location.  All CRLs will be
validated and then loaded into dirmngr's cache.

@item --lookup
@opindex lookup
Take the remaining arguments and run a lookup command on each of them.
The results are Base-64 encoded outputs (without header lines).  This
may be used to retrieve certificates from a server. However the output
format is not very well suited if more than one certificate is returned.

@item --url
@itemx -u
@opindex url
Modify the @command{lookup} and @command{load-crl} commands to take an URL.

@item --local
@itemx -l
@opindex url
Let the @command{lookup} command only search the local cache.

@item --squid-mode
@opindex squid-mode
Run @sc{dirmngr-client} in a mode suitable as a helper program for
Squid's @option{external_acl_type} option.


@end table

@ifset isman
@mansect see also
@command{dirmngr}(8),
@command{gpgsm}(1)
@include see-also-note.texi
@end ifset


@c
@c   GPGPARSEMAIL
@c
@node gpgparsemail
@section Parse a mail message into an annotated format

@manpage gpgparsemail.1
@ifset manverb
.B gpgparsemail
\- Parse a mail message into an annotated format
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  gpgparsemail
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ file ]
@end ifset

@mansect description
The @command{gpgparsemail} is a utility currently only useful for
debugging.  Run it with @code{--help} for usage information.



@c
@c  GPGTAR
@c
@manpage gpgtar.1
@node gpgtar
@section Encrypt or sign files into an archive
@ifset manverb
.B gpgtar
\- Encrypt or sign files into an archive
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B  gpgtar
.RI [ options ]
.I filename1
.I [ filename2, ... ]
.I directory1
.I [ directory2, ... ]
@end ifset

@mansect description
@command{gpgtar} encrypts or signs files into an archive.  It is an
gpg-ized tar using the same format as used by PGP's PGP Zip.

@manpause
@noindent
@command{gpgtar} is invoked this way:

@example
gpgtar [options] @var{filename1} [@var{filename2}, ...] @var{directory} [@var{directory2}, ...]
@end example

@mansect options
@noindent
@command{gpgtar} understands these options:

@table @gnupgtabopt

@item --create
@opindex create
Put given files and directories into a vanilla ``ustar'' archive.

@item --extract
@opindex extract
Extract all files from a vanilla ``ustar'' archive.

@item --encrypt
@itemx -e
@opindex encrypt
Encrypt given files and directories into an archive.  This option may
be combined with option @option{--symmetric} for an archive that may
be decrypted via a secret key or a passphrase.

@item --decrypt
@itemx -d
@opindex decrypt
Extract all files from an encrypted archive.

@item --sign
@itemx -s
Make a signed archive from the given files and directories.  This can
be combined with option @option{--encrypt} to create a signed and then
encrypted archive.

@item --list-archive
@itemx -t
@opindex list-archive
List the contents of the specified archive.

@item --symmetric
@itemx -c
Encrypt with a symmetric cipher using a passphrase.  The default
symmetric cipher used is @value{GPGSYMENCALGO}, but may be chosen with the
@option{--cipher-algo} option to @command{gpg}.

@item --recipient @var{user}
@itemx -r @var{user}
@opindex recipient
Encrypt for user id @var{user}. For details see @command{gpg}.

@item --local-user @var{user}
@itemx -u @var{user}
@opindex local-user
Use @var{user} as the key to sign with.  For details see @command{gpg}.

@item --output @var{file}
@itemx -o @var{file}
@opindex output
Write the archive to the specified file @var{file}.

@item --verbose
@itemx -v
@opindex verbose
Enable extra informational output.

@item --quiet
@itemx -q
@opindex quiet
Try to be as quiet as possible.

@item --skip-crypto
@opindex skip-crypto
Skip all crypto operations and create or extract vanilla ``ustar''
archives.

@item --dry-run
@opindex dry-run
Do not actually output the extracted files.

@item --directory @var{dir}
@itemx -C @var{dir}
@opindex directory
Extract the files into the directory @var{dir}.  The default is to
take the directory name from the input filename.  If no input filename
is known a directory named @file{GPGARCH} is used.  For tarball
creation, switch to directory @var{dir} before performing any
operations.

@item --files-from @var{file}
@itemx -T @var{file}
Take the file names to work from the file @var{file}; one file per
line.

@item --null
@opindex null
Modify option @option{--files-from} to use a binary nul instead of a
linefeed to separate file names.

@item --utf8-strings
@opindex utf8-strings
Assume that the file names read by @option{--files-from} are UTF-8
encoded.  This option has an effect only on Windows where the active
code page is otherwise assumed.

@item --openpgp
@opindex openpgp
This option has no effect because OpenPGP encryption and signing is
the default.

@item --cms
@opindex cms
This option is reserved and shall not be used.  It will eventually be
used to encrypt or sign using the CMS protocol; but that is not yet
implemented.

@item --batch
@opindex batch
Use batch mode.  Never ask but use the default action.  This option is
passed directly to @command{gpg}.

@item --yes
@opindex yes
Assume "yes" on most questions.  Often used together with
@option{--batch} to overwrite existing files.  This option is passed
directly to @command{gpg}.

@item --no
@opindex no
Assume "no" on most questions.  This option is passed directly to
@command{gpg}.

@item --require-compliance
@opindex require-compliance
This option is passed directly to @command{gpg}.

@item --status-fd @var{n}
@opindex status-fd
Write special status strings to the file descriptor @var{n}.
See the file DETAILS in the documentation for a listing of them.

@item --with-log
@opindex with-log
When extracting an encrypted tarball also write a log file with the
gpg output to a file named after the extraction directory with the
suffix ".log".

@item --set-filename @var{file}
@opindex set-filename
Use the last component of @var{file} as the output directory.  The
default is to take the directory name from the input filename.  If no
input filename is known a directory named @file{GPGARCH} is used.
This option is deprecated in favor of option @option{--directory}.

@item --gpg @var{gpgcmd}
@opindex gpg
Use the specified command @var{gpgcmd} instead of @command{gpg}.

@item --gpg-args @var{args}
@opindex gpg-args
Pass the specified extra options to @command{gpg}.

@item --tar-args @var{args}
@opindex tar-args
Assume @var{args} are standard options of the command @command{tar}
and parse them.  The only supported tar options are "--directory",
"--files-from", and "--null" This is an obsolete options because those
supported tar options can also be given directly.

@item --version
@opindex version
Print version of the program and exit.

@item --help
@opindex help
Display a brief help page and exit.

@end table

@mansect diagnostics
@noindent
The program returns 0 if everything was fine, 1 otherwise.


@mansect examples
@ifclear isman
@noindent
Some examples:

@end ifclear
@noindent
Encrypt the contents of directory @file{mydocs} for user Bob to file
@file{test1}:

@example
gpgtar --encrypt --output test1 -r Bob mydocs
@end example

@noindent
List the contents of archive @file{test1}:

@example
gpgtar --list-archive test1
@end example


@mansect see also
@ifset isman
@command{gpg}(1),
@command{tar}(1),
@end ifset
@include see-also-note.texi

@c
@c  GPG-CHECK-PATTERN
@c
@manpage gpg-check-pattern.1
@node gpg-check-pattern
@section Check a passphrase on stdin against the patternfile
@ifset manverb
.B gpg-check-pattern
\- Check a passphrase on stdin against the patternfile
@end ifset

@mansect synopsis
@ifset manverb
.B gpg\-check\-pattern
.RI [ options ]
.I patternfile
@end ifset

@mansect description
@command{gpg-check-pattern} checks a passphrase given on stdin against
a specified pattern file.

The pattern file is line based with comment lines beginning on the
@emph{first} position with a @code{#}.  Empty lines and lines with
only white spaces are ignored.  The actual pattern lines may either be
verbatim string pattern and match as they are (trailing spaces are
ignored) or extended regular expressions indicated by a @code{/} or
@code{!/} in the first column and terminated by another @code{/} or
end of line.  If a regular expression starts with @code{!/} the match
result is reversed. By default all comparisons are case insensitive.

Tag lines may be used to further control the operation of this tool.
The currently defined tags are:

@table @code
@item [icase]
Switch to case insensitive comparison for all further patterns.  This
is the default.

@item [case]
Switch to case sensitive comparison for all further patterns.

@item [reject]
Switch to reject mode.  This is the default mode.

@item [accept]
Switch to accept mode.
@end table

In the future more tags may be introduced and thus it is advisable not to
start a plain pattern string with an open bracket.  The tags must be
given verbatim on the line with no spaces to the left or any non white
space characters to the right.

In reject mode the program exits on the first match with an exit code
of 1 (failure).  If at the end of the pattern list the reject mode is
still active the program exits with code 0 (success).

In accept mode blocks of patterns are used.  A block starts at the
next pattern after an "accept" tag and ends with the last pattern
before the next "accept" or "reject" tag or at the end of the pattern
list.  If all patterns in a block match the program exits with an exit
code of 0 (success).  If any pattern in a block do not match the next
pattern block is evaluated.  If at the end of the pattern list the
accept mode is still active the program exits with code 1 (failure).


@mansect options
@noindent

@table @gnupgtabopt

@item --verbose
@opindex verbose
Enable extra informational output.

@item --check
@opindex check
Run only a syntax check on the patternfile.

@item --null
@opindex null
Input is expected to be null delimited.

@end table

@mansect see also
@ifset isman
@command{gpg-agent}(1),
@end ifset
@include see-also-note.texi
